release: 1.5.0 (#1231)
biomejs/biome: website/src/content/blog/roadmap-2024.md

---
title: Roadmap 2024
description: Roadmap 2024, v1.5.0 and new logo
summary: Roadmap 2024, v1.5.0 and new logo
authors:
  - ema
  - team
pubDate: 2024-01-06
coverImage:
  lightSrc: ../../assets/blog/roadmap-2024/banner-light.png
  darkSrc: ../../assets/blog/roadmap-2024/banner-dark.png
  alt: The Prettier challenge banner, with the Biome logo over it
socialImage: ../../assets/social-logo.png
---
## Roadmap 2024

We are thrilled to share what the Core Contributors and Maintainers would like to focus on in 2024.

> We want to remind the community that Biome is a project driven by the community, so we can't promise that all the ideas outlined below are going to be shipped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to remind that Biome is a community-driven project, so we can't promise that all the ideas outlined below are going to be shipped.
```

However, if you're excited about some aspects of the project, and you want to see some of them developed faster than others, you can help us in many ways:
- [**Be involved in the project and the community**](https://github.com/biomejs). Help us to build those features.
- [**Sponsor us**](https://opencollective.com/biome). Ask your company to sponsor us. Biome is so fast that can cut down CI times in your company, and save money. Performance is part of our mission. Plus, sponsorship is a good medium of _advertisement_ for your company.
- [**Improve our documentation with ideas, recipes, or guides**](/guides/getting-started). Translate our documentation, help us to make Biome available to people who aren't proficient in English.

### Preface

> The project is young and still can't compete against other giants such as Prettier, eslint, webpack, vite, esbuild, etc., although the recent events (sponsors, bounty challenge, Biome being a fork of Rome) showed that the users **have** interest in the project, and we showed those users that we have the tools for fulfilling a need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The project is young and still can't compete against other giants such as Prettier, ESLint, Webpack, Vite, ESBuild, etc., although the recent events (sponsors, bounty challenge, Biome being a fork of Rome) showed that the users **have** interest in the project, and we showed those users that we have the tools for fulfilling a need.
```

> Moving small projects from ESLint/Prettier is easy, but moving **big** code bases is challenging and time-consuming. This is a big friction to Biome.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Moving small projects from ESLint/Prettier is easy, but moving **big** code bases is challenging and time-consuming. This is a big point of friction in Biome.
```

> Users have different needs though, so it will be impossible to satisfy all of them, so we want to make sure that they contribute to our project and embrace our philosophy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users have different needs though, so it will be impossible to satisfy all of them. We want to make sure that all features and contributions to our project [embrace our philosophy](/internals/philosophy/) and provide the best experience by default.
```
Took a little creative freedom adding in the last part here, but I wanted to frame it as an opportunity rather than a restriction.

### Main area of focus

1. Help users to move to Biome

> 2. Increase Biome's languages, so Biome tools can span

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Expand Biome's language support, so Biome tools can span more of the web ecosystem
```
This phrase felt like it was missing a final part, so I added that in.

3. Deepen Biome's existing capabilities to offer more functionalities
4. Plugins
5. Transformations
6. Community and content

### Help users to move to Biome

- Offer guides on our website to users who want to migrate from Prettier (CLI commands and configuration)
- Offer guides on our website to users who want to migrate from ESlint (CLI commands and configuration)
- Offer a section on our website that shows a mapping of the ESLint rules to our rules
- Offer commands to ease the transition
  - A command called `biome migrate prettier` that will read `.prettierrc` and `.prettierignore`, will update the `biome.json` file (or create it) with the configuration coming from the Prettier files.
  - A command called `biome migrate eslint` that will read the JSON configuration of Eslint and the ignore file. There will be expectations and limitations.

> ### Increase Biome's languages, so Biome tools can span

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Expand Biome's language support
```
I figure the whole second piece doesn't necessarily need to be in this heading.

> CSS is going to be our next language of focus. HTML and Markdown will follow. Follow our [up-to-date page](/internals/language-support) to know the progress of our works.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CSS is our next language of focus and is making good progress. HTML and Markdown will follow. Follow our [up-to-date page](/internals/language-support) to keep up with the progress of our work.
```
Slightly changed the phrasing to call out that CSS has already been started since it's already pretty far along for parsing and formatting.

The idea of cross-linting can be explained with an example: compute the CSS styles/classes defined in a project, and warn a user when said styles aren't used inside JSX/HTML files.

Plus, we unlock another area of experimentation, which is embedded formatting.

HTML and Markdown will be our next languages of focus. HTML will enable us to parse other variants of HTML that are popular in the frontend ecosystem: [Vue](https://vuejs.org/), [Svelte](https://svelte.dev/) and [Astro](https://astro.build/). This would require some exploration on how to represent super languages of HTML.

### Deepen Biome's existing capabilities to offer more functionalities.

- Project analysis and dependency resolution
- Type system
- CLI

#### Project analysis and dependency resolution

We will provide lint rules that can read the manifest and do operations over it, such as invalid licenses.

With project resolution, we will be able to provide more lint rules, some of which will be able to detect unused modules.

With dependency resolution, we will be able to provide to - for example - detect dependencies that aren't used inside a project.

> With this infrastructure, our LSP is going to be more powerful and we will able to provide more features, for example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this infrastructure, our LSP is going to be more powerful and provide more features, for example:
```

- Implement the `--modified` argument, which allows to format - for example - only the modified lines of a document;
- Expose metrics for Biome's operations, and being able to track down possible performance bottlenecks;

### Plugins

We will explore plugins, and come up with a design that fits Biome.
Biome is different from other tools because Biome is a toolchain that has multiple tools in it, so we have to think out of the box and propose a design that might differ from the tools people are used to.

We don't know yet what a Biome's plugin will look like, although we think a plugin should be able to tap all the tools that Biome offers.

Some ideas that we will consider:
- DSL
- WASM
- A Runtime

### Transformations

Transformations and code generation are going to be our first steps towards our compiler.

We will provide the ability to transform TypeScript and JSX files into JavaScript files.

### Community and content

Biome has a growing ecosystem, with an official VSCode extension, an official IntelliJ extension, and a Discord bot. We want to grow the features provided by these tools and welcome any user who wants to help us.

> Our community is slowly growing, and we want to reward any person who sticks around a contributions to Biome. At Biome, **we value any type of contribution**, so you don't need to be proficient in Rust in order to help us. Even participating to discussions and help us to shape our features, or helping other people are considered *contributions*. If you think you contributed to our ecosystem, we encourage you to [candidate yourself as a maintainer of the project](https://github.com/biomejs/biome/blob/main/GOVERNANCE.md#maintainer-nomination).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our community is slowly growing, and we want to reward any person who sticks around and contributes to Biome. At Biome, **we value any type of contribution**, so you don't need to be proficient in Rust in order to help us. Even participating to discussions and help us to shape our features, or helping other people are considered *contributions*. If you'd like to continue contributing to our ecosystem, we also encourage you to [nominate yourself as a maintainer of the project](https://github.com/biomejs/biome/blob/main/GOVERNANCE.md#maintainer-nomination).
```
Slightly different phrasing that I think sounds a little more optimistic.

---
title: Roadmap 2024
description: Roadmap 2024, v1.5.0 and new logo
summary: Roadmap 2024, v1.5.0 and new logo
authors:
  - ema
  - team
pubDate: 2024-01-06
coverImage:
  lightSrc: ../../assets/blog/roadmap-2024/banner-light.png
  darkSrc: ../../assets/blog/roadmap-2024/banner-dark.png
  alt: The Prettier challenge banner, with the Biome logo over it
socialImage: ../../assets/old-social-logo.png
---
## Roadmap 2024

> We are thrilled to share what the Core Contributors and Maintainers would like to focus on in 2024.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We are thrilled to share what the Core Contributors and Maintainers would like to focus in 2024.
```

CSS is our next language of focus and is making good progress. HTML and Markdown will follow. Follow our [up-to-date page](/internals/language-support) to keep up with the progress of our work.

The CSS language will enable a lot of work and experimentation: CSS formatting and linting, and we will port some of the lint rules from `styelelint`. A new area of experimentation is cross-linting.

The idea of cross-linting can be explained with an example: compute the CSS styles/classes defined in a project, and warn a user when said styles aren't used inside JSX/HTML files.

Plus, we unlock another area of experimentation, which is embedded formatting.

HTML and Markdown will be our next languages of focus. HTML will enable us to parse other variants of HTML that are popular in the frontend ecosystem: [Vue](https://vuejs.org/), [Svelte](https://svelte.dev/) and [Astro](https://astro.build/). This would require some exploration on how to represent super languages of HTML.

### Deepen Biome's existing capabilities to offer more functionalities.

- Project analysis and dependency resolution
- Type system
- CLI

#### Project analysis and dependency resolution

> We will provide lint rules that can read the manifest and do operations over it, such as invalid licenses.

Reviewer 3: The end of the sentence don't make sense to me.
Which operations?

What about:

```suggestion
We will provide lint rules that can read the manifest, detect errors such as invalid licenses.
```

With project resolution, we will be able to provide more lint rules, some of which will be able to detect unused modules.

With dependency resolution, we will be able to provide to - for example - detect dependencies that aren't used inside a project.

With this infrastructure, our LSP is going to be more powerful and provide more features, for example:
- rename variables across a project;
- auto-complete for imports;
- in-line types

#### Type system

Building a full-fledged type system such as TypeScript is a massive effort, that's why we decided to take a different direction and start by building a subset of the type system that would require stricter typing. This approach would allow us to build some important lint rules that users have been asking for.

This will come with a downside: relying on a stricter code, and minimal type inference from the compiler.

> Once we have something we can rely on, we can slowly widen the type-checking functionality.

Reviewer 3: I think we should avoid using the expression `type-cheking` because we are not implementing a type checker.

Maybe:

```suggestion
Once we have something we can rely on, we can slowly widen the capabilities of our type system.
```

Recently Biome started its own [YouTube Channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC6ssscaFgCSlbv1Pb6krGVw). We will use this channel to share learning content with the community.

## New logo and homepage

With this blog post, we also want to officially announce our new logo, homepage and rebranding of the website.

With this new logo, we want to give a different meaning to the project. Biome **isn't** a fork of Rome anymore, but a self-sufficient project ready to bloom.

The triangle of the logo represents the mountains - **soil** -, and the curly shape on the bottom left represents a wave of the ocean - **water**. Two elements important to create a self-sufficient ecosystem, so it can thrive and grow.

## Version 1.5.0

With the Roadmap 2024, we also publish a new version. This version has few features around the CLI and **many** fixes in our formatter. Our TypeScript, JSX and JavaScript formatting has surpassed the **97% compatibility rate** with Prettier.

Update Biome using the following commands:

```shell

> npm i @biomejs/biome@latest --exact

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
npm i @biomejs/biome@latest --exact --save-dev
```

npx @biomejs/biome migrate
```

### New features

- Process only the files that were changed.
- The command `biome ci` now prints diagnostics in GitHub PRs.
- A new command `biome explain`.
- The command `biome migrate` updates the `$schema`.
- New lint rules.

#### Process only the files that were changed

> If you enable the integration with VCS, you can tell Biome to process only the files that were changed. As for now, this feature computes the files that were changed by using a VCS, so Biome doesn't know what's changed.

Reviewer 3: I could add a precision at the end:

```suggestion
If you enable the integration with VCS, you can tell Biome to process only the files that were changed. As for now, this feature computes the files that were changed by using a VCS, so Biome doesn't know exactly whicli lines changed.
```

---
title: Roadmap 2024
description: Roadmap 2024, v1.5.0 and new logo
summary: Roadmap 2024, v1.5.0 and new logo
authors:
  - ema
  - team
pubDate: 2024-01-06
coverImage:
  lightSrc: ../../assets/blog/roadmap-2024/banner-light.png
  darkSrc: ../../assets/blog/roadmap-2024/banner-dark.png
  alt: The Prettier challenge banner, with the Biome logo over it
socialImage: ../../assets/old-social-logo.png
---
## Roadmap 2024

> We are thrilled to share what the Core Contributors and Maintainers would like to focus in 2024.

Reviewer 4: missing an *on

> We want to remind that Biome is a community-driven project, so we can't promise that all the ideas outlined below are going to be shipped.

Reviewer 4: remind *you

However, if you're excited about some aspects of the project, and you want to see some of them developed faster than others, you can help us in many ways:

> - [**Be involved in the project and the community**](https://github.com/biomejs). Help us to build those features.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [**Be involved in the project and the community**](https://github.com/biomejs). Help us build those features.
```

Author: "Help us to build" is correct

Reviewer 4: > "Help us to build" is correct

while correct, the version without "to" is more commonly used with "help".

> - [**Sponsor us**](https://opencollective.com/biome). Ask your company to sponsor us. Biome is so fast that can cut down CI times in your company, and save money. Performance is part of our mission. Plus, sponsorship is a good medium of _advertisement_ for your company.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [**Sponsor us**](https://opencollective.com/biome). Ask your company to sponsor us. Biome is so fast that it can cut down CI times in your company, and save money. Performance is part of our mission. Plus, sponsorship is a good medium of _advertisement_ for your company.
```

> - [**Improve our documentation with ideas, recipes, or guides**](/guides/getting-started). Translate our documentation, help us to make Biome available to people who aren't proficient in English.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [**Improve our documentation with ideas, recipes, or guides**](/guides/getting-started). Translate our documentation, help us make Biome available to people who aren't proficient in English.
```

### Preface

The project is young and still can't compete against other giants such as Prettier, ESLint, Webpack, Vite, ESBuild, etc., although the recent events (sponsors, bounty challenge, Biome being a fork of Rome) showed that the users **have** interest in the project, and we showed those users that we have the tools for fulfilling a need.

Moving small projects from ESLint/Prettier is easy, but moving **big** code bases is challenging and time-consuming. This is a big point of friction in Biome.

Users have different needs though, so it will be impossible to satisfy all of them. We want to make sure that all features and contributions to our project [embrace our philosophy](/internals/philosophy/) and provide the best experience by default.

### Main area of focus

> 1. Help users to move to Biome

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Help users move to Biome
```

> 2. Expand Biome's language support, so Biome tools can span more of the web ecosystem

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Expand Biome's language support, so Biome tools can cover more of the web ecosystem
```

Recently Biome started its own [YouTube Channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC6ssscaFgCSlbv1Pb6krGVw). We will use this channel to share learning content with the community.

## New logo and homepage

With this blog post, we also want to officially announce our new logo, homepage and rebranding of the website.

With this new logo, we want to give a different meaning to the project. Biome **isn't** a fork of Rome anymore, but a self-sufficient project ready to bloom.

The triangle of the logo represents the mountains - **soil** -, and the curly shape on the bottom left represents a wave of the ocean - **water**. Two elements important to create a self-sufficient ecosystem, so it can thrive and grow.

## Version 1.5.0

> With the Roadmap 2024, we also publish a new version. This version has few features around the CLI and **many** fixes in our formatter. Our TypeScript, JSX and JavaScript formatting has surpassed the **97% compatibility rate** with Prettier.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Along with the Roadmap for 2024, we also published a new version. This version has few features around the CLI and **many** fixes in our formatter. Our TypeScript, JSX and JavaScript formatting has surpassed the **97% compatibility rate** with Prettier.
```
